Usage: cutadapt [options] <FASTA/FASTQ FILE> [<QUALITY FILE>]

Reads a FASTA or FASTQ file, finds and removes adapters,
and writes the changed sequence to standard output.
When finished, statistics are printed to standard error.

Use a dash "-" as file name to read from standard input
(FASTA/FASTQ is autodetected).

If two file names are given, the first must be a .fasta or .csfasta
file and the second must be a .qual file. This is the file format
used by some 454 software and by the SOLiD sequencer.
If you have color space data, you still need to provide the -c option
to correctly deal with color space!

If the name of any input or output file ends with '.gz', it is
assumed to be gzip-compressed.

If you want to search for the reverse complement of an adapter, you must
provide an additional adapter sequence using another -a, -b or -g parameter.

If the input sequences are in color space, the adapter
can be given in either color space (as a string of digits 0, 1, 2, 3) or in
nucleotide space.

EXAMPLE

Assuming your sequencing data is available as a FASTQ file, use this
command line:
$ cutadapt -e ERROR-RATE -a ADAPTER-SEQUENCE input.fastq > output.fastq

See the README file for more help and examples.

Options:
  --version             show program's version number and exit
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -f FORMAT, --format=FORMAT
                        Input file format; can be either 'fasta', 'fastq' or
                        'sra-fastq'. Ignored when reading csfasta/qual files
                        (default: auto-detect from file name extension).

  Options that influence how the adapters are found:
    Each of the following three parameters (-a, -b, -g) can be used
    multiple times and in any combination to search for an entire set of
    adapters of possibly different types. All of the given adapters will
    be searched for in each read, but only the best matching one will be
    trimmed (but see the --times option).

    -a ADAPTER, --adapter=ADAPTER
                        Sequence of an adapter that was ligated to the 3' end.
                        The adapter itself and anything that follows is
                        trimmed.
    -b ADAPTER, --anywhere=ADAPTER
                        Sequence of an adapter that was ligated to the 5' or
                        3' end. If the adapter is found within the read or
                        overlapping the 3' end of the read, the behavior is
                        the same as for the -a option. If the adapter overlaps
                        the 5' end (beginning of the read), the initial
                        portion of the read matching the adapter is trimmed,
                        but anything that follows is kept.
    -g ADAPTER, --front=ADAPTER
                        Sequence of an adapter that was ligated to the 5' end.
                        If the adapter sequence starts with the character '^',
                        the adapter is 'anchored'. An anchored adapter must
                        appear in its entirety at the 5' end of the read (it
                        is a prefix of the read). A non-anchored adapter may
                        appear partially at the 5' end, or it may occur within
                        the read. If it is found within a read, the sequence
                        preceding the adapter is also trimmed. In all cases,
                        the adapter itself is trimmed.
    -e ERROR_RATE, --error-rate=ERROR_RATE
                        Maximum allowed error rate (no. of errors divided by
                        the length of the matching region) (default: 0.1)
    -n COUNT, --times=COUNT
                        Try to remove adapters at most COUNT times. Useful
                        when an adapter gets appended multiple times (default:
                        1).
    -O LENGTH, --overlap=LENGTH
                        Minimum overlap length. If the overlap between the
                        read and the adapter is shorter than LENGTH, the read
                        is not modified.This reduces the no. of bases trimmed
                        purely due to short random adapter matches (default:
                        3).
    --match-read-wildcards
                        Allow 'N's in the read as matches to the adapter
                        (default: False).
    -N, --no-match-adapter-wildcards
                        Do not treat 'N' in the adapter sequence as wildcards.
                        This is needed when you want to search for literal 'N'
                        characters.

  Options for filtering of processed reads:
    --discard-trimmed, --discard
                        Discard reads that contain the adapter instead of
                        trimming them. Also use -O in order to avoid throwing
                        away too many randomly matching reads!
    --discard-untrimmed, --trimmed-only
                        Discard reads that do not contain the adapter.
    -m LENGTH, --minimum-length=LENGTH
                        Discard trimmed reads that are shorter than LENGTH.
                        Reads that are too short even before adapter removal
                        are also discarded. In colorspace, an initial primer
                        is not counted (default: 0).
    -M LENGTH, --maximum-length=LENGTH
                        Discard trimmed reads that are longer than LENGTH.
                        Reads that are too long even before adapter removal
                        are also discarded. In colorspace, an initial primer
                        is not counted (default: no limit).

  Options that influence what gets output to where:
    -o FILE, --output=FILE
                        Write the modified sequences to this file instead of
                        standard output and send the summary report to
                        standard output. The format is FASTQ if qualities are
                        available, FASTA otherwise. (default: standard output)
    --info-file=FILE    Write information about each read and its adapter
                        matches into FILE. Currently experimental: Expect the
                        file format to change!
    -r FILE, --rest-file=FILE
                        When the adapter matches in the middle of a read,
                        write the rest (after the adapter) into a file. Use -
                        for standard output.
    --wildcard-file=FILE
                        When the adapter has wildcard bases ('N's) write
                        adapter bases matching wildcard positions to FILE. Use
                        - for standard output. When there are indels in the
                        alignment, this may occasionally not be quite
                        accurate.
    --too-short-output=FILE
                        Write reads that are too short (according to length
                        specified by -m) to FILE. (default: discard reads)
    --untrimmed-output=FILE
                        Write reads that do not contain the adapter to FILE,
                        instead of writing them to the regular output file.
                        (default: output to same file as trimmed)

  Additional modifications to the reads:
    -q CUTOFF, --quality-cutoff=CUTOFF
                        Trim low-quality ends from reads before adapter
                        removal. The algorithm is the same as the one used by
                        BWA (Subtract CUTOFF from all qualities; compute
                        partial sums from all indices to the end of the
                        sequence; cut sequence at the index at which the sum
                        is minimal) (default: 0)
    --quality-base=QUALITY_BASE
                        Assume that quality values are encoded as
                        ascii(quality + QUALITY_BASE). The default (33) is
                        usually correct, except for reads produced by some
                        versions of the Illumina pipeline, where this should
                        be set to 64. (default: 33)
    -x PREFIX, --prefix=PREFIX
                        Add this prefix to read names
    -y SUFFIX, --suffix=SUFFIX
                        Add this suffix to read names
    --strip-suffix=STRIP_SUFFIX
                        Remove this suffix from read names if present. Can be
                        given multiple times.
    -c, --colorspace    Colorspace mode: Also trim the color that is adjacent
                        to the found adapter.
    -d, --double-encode
                        When in color space, double-encode colors (map
                        0,1,2,3,4 to A,C,G,T,N).
    -t, --trim-primer   When in color space, trim primer base and the first
                        color (which is the transition to the first
                        nucleotide)
    --strip-f3          For color space: Strip the _F3 suffix of read names
    --maq, --bwa        MAQ- and BWA-compatible color space output. This
                        enables -c, -d, -t, --strip-f3, -y '/1' and -z.
    --length-tag=TAG    Search for TAG followed by a decimal number in the
                        name of the read (description/comment field of the
                        FASTA or FASTQ file). Replace the decimal number with
                        the correct length of the trimmed read. For example,
                        use --length-tag 'length=' to correct fields like
                        'length=123'.
    -z, --zero-cap      Change negative quality values to zero (workaround to
                        avoid segmentation faults in BWA)
